Germs, this is Tintern Abbey, it's one
of a number of monasteries dissolved
during the reign of Henry VIII
between 1536 and 1541.
Before that the English and Welsh
landscape was rich with these spaces.
They were, with all their songs,
prayers and
books, an integral part of
the landscape and culture.
It been said that no where in England
could you be more than a 30 minute
walk from the monastery like this.
Since they occupied so much land, about a
third of the land in England to be clear,
and on that scale they provided
a lot of employment and
they also provided a lot of education.
Now remember,
this is before universal public education.
In fact, one could easily argue that
the destruction of these monasteries
set back the education of women in
England by a couple hundred years,
source in the description below.
The impact of these structures, though,
went far beyond practical purposes,
like employment and education.
Their primary function was prayer, and
through this prayer they served as
a contact point between heaven and Earth.
They connected the fabric of England
to the divine, and in the 15th century,
that is a practical purpose, so
I'm sorry if I implied that it wasn't.
The monasteries also kept the books and
the relics.
Unless you were one of the elites and
able to attend university,
these institutions were your best hope of
learning how to read, or to find a book.
The relics that they held attracted
tourists from all over and
stimulated local economies.
Back then tourists were called pilgrims,
so basically they were responsible for
education, employment, and tourism, and
the very salvation of one's community.
They were pretty important places,
but they had their problems too.
All that land these monasteries occupied,
technically belonged to the church,
which was headquartered in Rome, so
the revenue that they generated
had to be filtered through Rome.
Henry the VIII's decision for
England to leave the Catholic church
in 1534 wasn't just symbolic,
it was also a land grab.
He felt that the state of England,
him, could manage that land better.
There were other problems, too, those
libraries really only had religious books.
The education that they provided was
really only religious education.
The employment structures that they used
were often corrupt, inefficient, or both.
And finally those relics that
had attracted those tourists,
they were often fabricated.
They weren't real, monasteries
claimed to have stuff like milk from
the Virgin Mary's breast, which is
both a strange claim and a false one.
So when Henry VIII's agents
dissolved these monasteries and
they took off the roofs,
they confiscated and
destroyed the relics along with
a whole bunch of religious art.
The destruction of religious structures
like this has a special name in our
history, Iconoclasm.
And that's what I want to
talk about in this video,
the relationship between art and faith.
The Protestant Reformation which took
place in Europe during the reign
of Henry the VIII provoked waves of
Iconoclasm, statues were broken and
the walls were white washed.
The belief system behind this, the belief
that religious art has a pernicious affect
on the viewer was not new or
exclusive to Protestants.
Other Abrahamic religions Judaism and
Islam both do not permit
representational art.
Both will cite the story of Moses and
the golden calf as proof of
art's negative impact on faith.
When Moses came down from Mount Sinai
with the Ten Commandments, he found his
brother Aaron and the Israelites
worshiping a golden calf instead of God.
Which was unfortunate because one of those
commandments said that there shouldn't be
any graven images worshiped
above the divinity.
So they got in trouble with God,
that's bad.
But Christianity has always
been different in that regard.
There is a rich tradition of
representational Christian art.
One of the defining authors of
the Christian doctrine, Luke,
the author of the Gospel of Luke,
is rumored to have also been a painter.
And one of his subjects was none
other than the Virgin Mary.
So if Luke can do it,
why can't I, why can't Raphael?
Additionally, there's the story
of Christ carrying his cross and
being given a cloth to wipe his face with.
When the cloth was returned
to the woman who provided it,
she found Christ's face
had been imprinted there.
We don't know the name of this woman
who gave the cloth to Jesus, so
Christians have ever since referred to
her as the Saint of the True Image, or
in Latin, vero-icona, Veronica,
she's Saint Veronica.
The point is she had a picture of Jesus,
and
that's cool, so
representational art is cool.
The general philosophy in Catholicism is
that representational art of Jesus or
Mary is fine.
Not only because of Luke and Veronica but
because people can tell the difference
between representation and reality.
No one will try to cut down a picture of
a tree thinking it would provide firewood,
so nobody would pray to
a painting of Jesus and
mistake the painting for being Jesus,
we're smarter than that.
But that's not really true, we may like to
think people know the difference between
representation and
the thing represented, but
there notable examples of when
this failed to be the case.
Take, for example, the story of
a painting printed in a work from 1476.
In the story, Pope Boniface VIII
oversees the reconstruction and
redecoration of the old Basilica
of Saint John Lateran, in Rome.
His artists follow their instructions, and
then take initiative to fill in some blank
spaces with a portrait of Saint Francis
and a portrait of Saint Anthony.
Boniface accepts the portrait
of Saint Francis but
orders Saint Anthony be removed.
But then the story goes that the workers
sent to remove it were driven
away by a terrible gigantic spirit and
couldn't perform the task.
Boniface conceded,
let Saint Anthony alone,
he said,
since we can see he wants to stay.
Clearly this painting was treated
as though it was Saint Anthony and
not a simple representation
of Saint Anthony.
And this wasn't some uneducated guy
living on the edge of civilization,
this was the Pope.
So protestants like John Calvin who
preached iconoclasm have their reasons.
The representation of God or Mary or
the communion of saints could be worshiped
instead of the concept of the divine
that they were intended to represent.
Especially in the years before
the Protestant Reformation.
I mean, I've been guilty
of worshiping Michelangelo.
But this worship of the representation in
place of the divine is the golden calf
story all over again.
So there were two factions, the Catholics
who continued to believe in the positive
elements of representational art
outweighed the negatives, and
the Protestants who saw representational
art as extremely dangerous.
Art communicates through the senses and
so ultimately this is a question of
whether or not our senses can be leveraged
to build religious knowledge and faith.
Or if they're just a distraction from true
faith which doesn't require the senses.
Different religions deal with
this question differently.
If we leave the Abrahamic religions for
a second, we can look at
Tibetan Buddhism for further insight.
In that tradition, the practitioners
believe that the full scope of the human
experience, including sense perception
can be leveraged to enlightenment.
Think of it like this, have you ever
felt spiritually connected to a song?
Have you entered a space and been stopped
suddenly by the power of the architecture?
Seen a sunset that forced
you to be silent for
a second, danced so wildly that you
seemed to lose yourself in a moment.
Well, some religious traditions think
those kinds of spiritual moments can be
a path to understanding
something greater than yourself.
In fact, Catholicism doubled down on
that approach in the years following
the Reformation with Baroque art,
which clearly emphasizes
the role of sensory perception.
Spaces like these are intended
to leverage your senses and
to inspire a religious experience.
So let's return to the ruins
of Tintern Abbey, they remain,
albeit in ruins, and
remind us of a time when these once
great structures represented
a connection between heaven and Earth.
The physical presence of this structure,
the chanting, the singing, they all lifted
this space up to commune with the divine.
The sensory experience of these activities
has connected England to heaven, and
now the stones slowly return to nature.
So we have to return to that question,
what is the relationship of art to faith?
Can physical senses be
manipulated through art
to inspire faith in something greater than
ourselves, or are they a distraction?
There are a lot of similarities between
the art world and the religious world.
Indeed, it's difficult to name an artistic
medium that doesn't have its origins
in religious ritual.
And when you enter a museum or
religious structure, there is
a similar reverence for the space.
A certain quiet but
also a certain expectation of meaning.
We have a built-in assumption in these
spaces that the objects we see have
an intention or
meaning beyond their physical reality.
Like take those relics I discussed
earlier, for example, real or
not, they had power, they could elevate
the perceptor's religious imagination.
We all have objects that have
an unreasonable significance or
a sentimental value to
us on a personal level.
Those relics had that, but at a communal
or shared level, and that's real.
That feeling isn't fake even if
the stories surrounding the object is.
Art consistently does that as well,
it can lift an every day object up and
inject it with significance.
Think of Duchamp's readymades or Louise
Nevelson's sculptures from salvaged wood.
The ruins of Tintern Abbey no longer
sit in the tradition of Christianity.
No one sees Tintern Abbey as
a link to the heavens anymore.
But we are certainly awed by it and
walking in these ruins does connect us to
something, our past maybe, our
instinctual love of the aesthetic form,
our relationship to time,
our relationship to nature.
And I have no idea,
I know this space has significance
greater than the stones that compose it.
I know that I'm having
a spiritual moment here and
it's not just me,
these ruins have inspired poetry.
If you've ever heard of Tintern Abby
before this video, it's most likely
because you've read the poem by
William Wordsworth in your English class.
They also inspired artists,
like JMW Turner or
Elizabeth Hay, and
numerous others as well.
These monasteries once held religious art,
objects with a theatrical purpose,
objects beyond objecthood that
spectators projected meaning onto.
Churches, monasteries, and other religious
buildings around the world still do that,
but today we also have art museums
that fulfill a similar role.
So I'm still left wondering what that
relationship between art and faith is.
Is it an aid or a distraction?
Are art galleries religious spaces,
have they replaced religious spaces?
I don't know, but i'd love to hear
your thoughts in the comments below.
If you liked this video,
please consider subscribing.
These days i'm putting out a new video
on about the 15th of every month.
I also have a Patreon link in
the doobly doo below, if you feel so
inspired, and as always,
thanks for watching.